Enable Native OpenTelemetry Tracing ADR (#177)
redhat-appstudio/architecture: ADR/0033-enable-native-opentelemetry-tracing.md

OpenTelemetry is the industry standard to instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data (metrics, logs, and traces) to help you analyze software performance and behavior. Our goal is to collect [traces](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/) from the Konflux activity of building applications.

Instrumenting Konflux with [OpenTelemetry (OTel)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) tracing will provide SREs and developers invaluable insight for incident response, debugging and monitoring. Our goal is to get traces for the Konflux activity in order to achieve an easier mental model to use for debugging.

## Decision

We are going to enable as much native tracing in Konflux as we can by quickly enabling any pre-existing tracing capabilities in the system. Any other type of tracing (e.g. zero code instrumentation or code based instrumentation) is out of scope for this ADR.

> For instance, [Pipeline Service](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/architecture/blob/main/architecture/pipeline-service.md) has to be instrumented with OTel as it provides Tekton APIs and services to Konflux. Pipeline Services includes Tekton which already natively supports [OpenTelemetry Distributed Tracing for Tasks and Pipelines](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0124-distributed-tracing-for-tasks-and-pipelines.md), so no upstream changes are required. We just need to work to enable this native tracing (e.g. set environment variables).

Reviewer: A bit misleading, in that the feature you note only applies to the core tekton controller.

Neither PAC, nor chains, nor results has the capability yet.  At least some in Konflux consider all those "Pipeline Service".

If you want this across all of tekton, you need to duplicate https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/5746 in all those other projects.

Reviewer: Of course with open source, everyone can contribute :-) .... but if we stay in silos and expect openshift pipelines to update those other projects, updating those other projects will get prioritized against a bunch of other Konflux and non-Konflux asks, as there is not longer a dedicated team for the Konflux pipeline service mission (with it getting rolled into openshift pipelines).

Author: Then I guess more accurate wording would be to state that we are enabling tracing in the core tekton controller in Konflux instead of the pipeline service then?

I'm asking because the proposed scope for this ADR is to enable as much native tracing as possible, and not add code-based instrumentation (that would be part of a follow up ADR).

Reviewer: > Then I guess more accurate wording would be to state that we are enabling tracing in the core tekton controller in Konflux instead of the pipeline service then?

yes;  and then say upstream work is needed to enable this for pac, chains, and results

also, if possible, I'd like to start reducing our use of  the term "pipeline service" , and just say Tekton or OpenShift Pipelines (the RH Tekton offering).  At this point, all "pipeline service" really means is how Konflux configures Tekton.
> 
> I'm asking because the proposed scope for this ADR is to enable as much native tracing as possible, and not add code-based instrumentation (that would be part of a follow up ADR).

sounds good / makes sense .... that follow up notion, it not already detailed in the ADR, should be then.

Author: Updated the ADR. PTAL.

Reviewer: realized my abbreviations may not have been expansive enough ... just in case:
- "pac" : pipelines as code i.e. https://github.com/openshift-pipelines/pipelines-as-code/ ... this is how Konflux receives github / gitlab events and triggers the secure supply chain pipelines
- "chains" : tekton chains i.e. https://github.com/tektoncd/chains which is leveraged by the enterprise contract team for all  the attestations, signings, etc.
- "results" : tekton results i.e. https://github.com/tektoncd/results which is how Konflux currently is offloading pipelinerun/taskrun yaml and underlying pods logs to RDS and S3 respectively so that users can access that data after those items are pruned from etcd, where we prune from etcd to both 1) avoid the scaling limits of etcd, 2) free up the PVCs currently used by the Konflux pipelines, as AWS limits on these are well beyond Konflux's needs

There are a few ways to enable native tracing in Konflux. Openshift and Tekton natively have Jaeger tracing which can be collected by a compatible application, such as an actual Jaeger instance, an OpenTelemetry collector or even something like Grafana Tempo.

We recommend using an OpenTelemetry Collector as the way to collect Konflux native tracing as it has the least installation and setup overhead while also providing flexibility to forward traces to any tracing frontend.

## Consequences

Additional applications will have to be installed in the same OpenShift cluster that the Konflux instance runs or OpenTelemetry collector(s) will have to be available in order to collect traces. Also, some configuration changes are required on the tekton-pipelines namespace in the OpenShift cluster that the Konflux instance runs.

Enabling Konflux native tracing is not without risks:
- There is a span or trace flooding risk from within the OpenShift cluster

> - There is a secret leakage risk (although this is not an exclusive risk for traces, logs are also liable to this)

Reviewer 2: Any plans on how to mitigate these risks?

Author: The trace flooding risk is something that will only happen if an attacker gains access to the cluster Konflux is hosted in and triggers a specific attack. So I guess while it can be seen as a risk, it is more akin to a side effect of a potentially greater issue.

The leakage risk is inherent to any type of logging and can be mitigated by careful logging. In this ADR's case, as we are enabling just the native tracing, we expect no leakage.

# 33. Enable Native OpenTelemetry Tracing

> Date started: 2024-02-27
> Date accepted: 2024-04-02

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Date started: 2024-02-27

Date accepted: 2024-04-02
```

Nit: needs a newline to display properly

Author: Will fix.

Author: Fixed spacing.

## Status

Accepted

## Context

> Konflux is a tool under active development and, therefore, unforeseen issues may arise. A recent (at the time of writing this ADR) example is the [long running](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions/pull/856/checks?check_run_id=22307468968) [e2e-test](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions/blob/main/.tekton/tasks/e2e-test.yaml) in [Konflux’s build definitions](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions). Fixing and debugging such issues is not a trivial thing for Konflux’s developers. Additional data, metrics, telemetry and tracing are essential in enabling Konflux developers and SREs to come up with fixes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Konflux is a tool under active development and, therefore, unforeseen issues may arise. A recent (at the time of writing this ADR) example is the [long running](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions/pull/856/checks?check_run_id=22307468968) [e2e-test](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions/blob/main/.tekton/tasks/e2e-test.yaml) in Konflux’s build definitions. Fixing and debugging such issues is not a trivial thing for Konflux’s developers. Additional data, metrics, telemetry and tracing are essential in enabling Konflux developers and SREs to come up with fixes.
```

Nit: removing a redundant link.

Author: Will fix.

Author: Removed redundant link.

Tracing, in particular, enables a straightforward model for dealing with complex, distributed systems. It gives unique insight into a system’s execution, grouping functions together. These grouping functions can be critical for finding fields that correlate to some problem, and provide powerful insights to reduce the range of possible causes.

> Konflux users will also benefit from tracing, as they gain a more introspective view into their application’s build pipeline, enabling them to focus on effective and impactful corrective actions.

Reviewer 3: Did you mean Konflux developers/SRE instead of users or are you anticipating that tracing data will be readily accessible to them? For reference, users generally don't have access to system logs or metrics and we don't encourage them to request access either. I think we should be cautious about granting access to traces by default and move that decision or suggestion out of this ADR.

Author: In that case I'll remove all "users" mentions from the ADR.

Author: Removed all mentions to "users".

OpenTelemetry is the industry standard to instrument, generate, collect, and export telemetry data (metrics, logs, and traces) to help you analyze software performance and behavior. Our goal is to collect [traces](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/) from the Konflux activity of building applications.

> Instrumenting Konflux with [OpenTelemetry (OTel)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) tracing will provide SREs, developers and users invaluable insight for incident response, debugging and monitoring. Our goal is to get traces for the Konflux activity in order to achieve an easier mental model to use for debugging.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Instrumenting Konflux with [OpenTelemetry (OTel)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) tracing will provide SREs and developers invaluable insight for incident response, debugging and monitoring. Our goal is to get traces for the Konflux activity in order to achieve an easier mental model to use for debugging.
```

Removing users based on my other comment.

Author: Removed all mentions to users.

## Decision

We are going to enable as much native tracing in Konflux as we can by quickly enabling any pre-existing tracing capabilities in the system. Any other type of tracing (e.g. zero code instrumentation or code based instrumentation) is out of scope for this ADR.

For instance, [Pipeline Service](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/architecture/blob/main/architecture/pipeline-service.md) has to be instrumented with OTel as it provides Tekton APIs and services to Konflux. Pipeline Services includes Tekton which already natively supports [OpenTelemetry Distributed Tracing for Tasks and Pipelines](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0124-distributed-tracing-for-tasks-and-pipelines.md), so no upstream changes are required. We just need to work to enable this native tracing (e.g. set environment variables).

There are a few ways to enable native tracing in Konflux. Openshift and Tekton natively have Jaeger tracing which can be collected by a compatible application, such as an actual Jaeger instance, an OpenTelemetry collector or even something like Grafana Tempo.

> We recommend using an OpenTelemetry Collector as the way to collect Konflux native tracing as it has the least installation and setup overhead while also providing flexibility to forward traces to any tracing viewing frontend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We recommend using an OpenTelemetry Collector as the way to collect Konflux native tracing as it has the least installation and setup overhead while also providing flexibility to forward traces to any tracing frontend.
```

Author: Will fix.

Author: Fixed.

## Consequences

> Additional applications will have to be installed in the same OpenShift cluster that the Konflux instance runs, or a Jaeger instance or OpenTelemetry collector will have to be available in order to collect traces. Also, some configuration changes are required on the tekton-pipelines namespace in the OpenShift cluster that the Konflux instance runs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional applications will have to be installed in the same OpenShift cluster that the Konflux instance runs and OpenTelemetry collector(s) will have to be available in order to collect traces. Also, some configuration changes are required on the tekton-pipelines namespace in the OpenShift cluster that the Konflux instance runs.
```

The decision earlier states we will use Otel collectors.

Author: It was an oversight, will remove the mention to Jaeger.

Author: Removed the Jaeger mention.

Enabling Konflux native tracing is not without risks:
- There is a span or trace flooding risk from within the OpenShift cluster
- There is a secret leakage risk (although this is not an exclusive risk for traces, logs are also liable to this)

> However, we assess that the benefits far outweigh the risks and therefore, by instrumenting Konflux with [OpenTelemetry (OTel)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) tracing, we will provide Konflux SREs, developers and users invaluable insight for incident response, debugging and monitoring, ultimately achieving an improved mental model for debugging and incident response.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, we assess that the benefits far outweigh the risks and therefore, by instrumenting Konflux with [OpenTelemetry (OTel)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) tracing, we will provide Konflux SREs and developers invaluable insight for incident response, debugging and monitoring, ultimately achieving an improved mental model for debugging and incident response.
```

Author: Will fix.

Author: Removed all mentions to users.

Instrumenting Konflux with [OpenTelemetry (OTel)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) tracing will provide SREs and developers invaluable insight for incident response, debugging and monitoring. Our goal is to get traces for the Konflux activity in order to achieve an easier mental model to use for debugging.

## Decision

We are going to enable as much native tracing in Konflux as we can by quickly enabling any pre-existing tracing capabilities in the system. Any other type of tracing (e.g. zero code instrumentation or code based instrumentation) is out of scope for this ADR.

Native tracing will be enabled for the core Tekton controller as no upstream changes are required in order to do so, as Tekton  already natively supports [OpenTelemetry Distributed Tracing for Tasks and Pipelines](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0124-distributed-tracing-for-tasks-and-pipelines.md). We just need to work to enable this native tracing (e.g. set environment variables).

> Other Tekton pieces that Konflux leverages such as [chains](https://tekton.dev/docs/chains/) and [results](https://tekton.dev/docs/results/) will have to be instrumented separately and will require upstream changes, so they are out of scope for this ADR.

Reviewer: other than listing pipelines as code here as well, I'm good with the updates; thanks

Author: Added a pac mention.
